1. A 78-year-old hypermetropic lady presents to the main casualty unit one evening with severe ocular pain of sudden onset, a red eye, dilated pupil and reduced vision.
2. A 58-year-old man develops a sudden bright red patch on the white of the eye, vision is not affected, the eye is slightly sore.
3. A 45-year-old man develops pain in the eyes which have become more red and the vision slightly blurred. He has a watery discharge. There is no past ocular or medical history.
4. A 23-year-old myopic man develops an acute, painful red eye. He notices that the vision is becoming blurred. He is a contact lens wearer but has no other eye history.
5. A 56-year-old lady presents with photophobia, redness of the eye and blurred vision. She has no previous eye history. She has been diagnosed with sarcoidosis and is currently on systemic prednisolone. There is a family history of glaucoma.
2. Differential diagnosis: sudden loss of vision
a Central retinal vein occlusion
b Central retinal artery occlusion
c Acute glaucoma
d Endophthalmitis
e Giant cell arteritis
f Macular degeneration
g Diabetic retinopathy
h Optic neuritis
i Orbital cellulitis
j Raised intracranial pressure
k Amaurosis fugax
1 Retinal detachment

For each of the following scenarios what is the single most likely diagnosis?
1. A 23 -year-old female presents with loss of vision in the right eye over 3 days; she also complains that the right eye is painful when she moves it. She is otherwise fit and well, with no past ocular or medical history. Examination reveals an acuity of counting fingers in the right eye, $6 / 6$ in the left. The eye is white, the pupils equal and reactive to light, but a right relative afferent pupillary defect is present. Examination of the fundus is normal.
2. A 24-year-old overweight female has recently developed a headache and notices that she sees double when looking to the left. Yesterday she suddenly lost her vision for a few seconds when she rose from a chair. She is otherwise fit and well. She takes the contraceptive pill. Examination reveals normal visual acuity and colour vision. There is reduced abduction of the left eye. The eyes are quiet, intraocular pressure normal. The optic discs appear swollen. Neurological examination is normal.
3. A 76-year-old lady is driving her car when she notices a sudden curtain coming over the left eye. The vision is lost for about 15 minutes and then the curtain lifts. She has a history of systemic hypertension and has recently been diagnosed with diabetes. There is no other medical history. On examination you can find no abnormality.
4. A 72-year-old man with a previous diagnosis of glaucoma presents with a sudden loss of vision in the right eye. There is no pain. He is hypertensive. There is a family history of macular degeneration. Examination reveals a visual acuity of counting fingers in the right eye, $6 / 6$ in the left. The eye is white, intraocular pressure is not raised. The pupils are equal and no relative afferent pupillary defect is present. Dilated fundoscopy reveals a swollen optic disc and multiple haemorrhages scattered over the retina. The retinal veins appear dilated and tortuous.
5. An 80-year-old lady presents with sudden loss of vision in the right eye. She complains of severe pain over the right side of her head, which is painful to touch. There is no past ocular history. She has not been able to eat recently as her jaw has been painful when she tries to chew; an appointment with the dentist has been arranged. She also feels tired and has developed a pain in her shoulders. On examination the vision in the right eye is perception of light, left eye 6/6. The eyes are white, intraocular pressure is normal. A right relative afferent pupillary defect is present. Dilated fundoscopy reveals a slightly swollen optic disc with some pale white lesions between the disc and the macula.

\section*{3. Complications: ophthalmic surgery}
a Endophthalmitis
b Cystoid macular oedema
c Astigmatism
d Posterior capsule rupture
e Iris prolapse
f Retinal detachment
g Posterior capsule opacification
h Corneal graft rejection
For each of the following scenarios what is the single most likely diagnosis?
1. A 67-year-old man had cataract surgery 2 days previously. The eye has become increasingly red and painful and the vision more blurred.
2. An 80 -year-old lady had cataract surgery 2 years ago. Recently she has noticed that the vision in the operated eye has become a little blurred. The eye is not painful and she notices no distortion of vision.
3. A 50-year-old myopic male had a cataract operation 3 months previously in his right eye. He suddenly noted several floaters in this eye a week ago. These were accompanied by some flashing lights. Yesterday he noted a defect in his visual field which is getting worse.
4. A 46-year-old female with a history of iritis had a cataract operation. The vision initially improved but a week later was blurred once again. There was no pain and the eye was not red.
5. A 36 -year-old man had a corneal graft 6 months ago. Recently the vision has become blurred and the eye red.

\section*{4. Treatment: pharmacological treatment}
a Ganciclovir
b Prostaglandin analogue
c Artificial tears
d Acetazolamide
e Anti-VEGF agent
f Tetracycline
g Azithromycin
h Pilocarpine
i Chloramphenicol
j Methylprednisolone
Choose the most appropriate single therapy in the following situations.
1. A 76-year-old man has been referred by his optician with a visual field defect, raised intraocular pressure and cupping of the optic disc. You confirm the findings and start treatment.
2. A 82-year-old lady comes to casualty with a very painful right eye and loss of vision. Visual acuity is only hand movements in the affected eye. The
cornea is cloudy and the pupil is dilated. It will take her at least an hour to see an ophthalmologist at another hospital.
3. A 78-year-old lady notices a sudden reduction in vision in the right eye and distortion when looking at a straight line. A fluorescein angiogram suggests that there are abnormal leaking blood vessels below the macula.
4. A 56-year-old man has been troubled with sore red eyes for some time. He has been diagnosed as suffering from acne rosacea. On examination he has been found to have the signs of blepharitis. This has not responded to conservative treatment with lid toilet.
5. A 25 -year-old male with known AIDS presents with reduced vision and floaters. Examination of his right retina shows white and haemorrhagic lesions.

\section*{5. Differential diagnosis: pupil}
a Horner's syndrome
b Adie's pupil
c Argyll Robertson pupil
d Application of atropine drops
e Application of pilocarpine drops
f Third nerve palsy
g Relative afferent pupillary defect
h Application of cyclopentolate drops
i Application of tropicamide drops
j Physiological anisocoria
Choose the most appropriate single diagnosis in the following abnormalities affecting the pupils.
1. A 25 -year-old female comes into the surgery concerned that in a recent group photograph it was pointed out to her that the right pupil looked bigger than the left. She had no visual problems and no diplopia. On examination her eye movements were full, no ptosis was present and the difference in pupil size was confirmed. The right pupil constricted poorly to light.
2. A 67-year-old man who had smoked all his life noted that his left pupil was smaller than his right and his left lid drooped slightly. On examination the findings were confirmed and both pupils reacted normally to light. The difference in pupil size was more pronounced in the dark.
3. An 80 -year-old man with a diagnosis of glaucoma for which he had been on the same treatment for many years attended his optician. He was noted to have bilaterally small pupils which did not appear to react to light.
4. A 45-year-old man attended his GP with a frontal headache and reduced vision in his left eye. The GP confirmed that the vision was reduced and noted that although the pupils were equal, when a light was moved from the right to the left eye both pupils appeared to dilate. The optic nerve on the left appeared pale, that on the right was normal.
5. A child suspected of having a squint had been taken to the eye hospital one afternoon. The following morning his mother phoned the GP saying that his pupils were dilated.
6. Differential diagnosis: field defect
a Central scotoma
b Bitemporal hemianopia
c Incongruous left hemianopia
d Congruous left hemianopia
e Arcuate field defect
f Altitudinal field defect
g Enlarged blind spot
h Constricted visual field
Choose the most appropriate single field defect in the following situations.
1. A 77-year-old man with hypertension and diabetes notices that he is unable to see on the left hand side. An MRI scan confirms a right cortical infarct.
2. A 63 -year-old lady with hypertension notices that she has blurred vision in the right eye on waking one morning. The ophthalmologist records a reduced visual acuity, right afferent pupillary defect and a swollen optic disc surrounded by haemorrhages.
3. A 12 -year-old boy notices that his vision is becoming increasingly poor at night. His ophthalmologist notices that his visual acuity is normal but there is pigmentation on the peripheral retina, the disc looks pale and the retinal vessels attenuated.
4. A 50-year-old man presents to his GP saying that he feels his peripheral vision is reduced and he often spilled the water when making a cup of tea. The GP notes that although his acuity was normal he missed the temporal letters on the Snellen chart with each eye.
5. A 62 -year-old lady was found by her optometrist to have a raised intraocular pressure in the right eye. He noted that the optic disc appeared cupped on the right compared to the left. The eye otherwise appeared normal.
7. Differential diagnosis: eye movements
a Convergent squint
b Divergent squint
c Third nerve palsy
d Fourth nerve plasy
e Sixth nerve palsy
f Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
g Myasthenia gravis
h Duane's syndrome
i Brown's syndrome
j Parinaud's syndrome
k Dysthyroid eye disease

Choose the most appropriate single diagnosis in the following situations.
1. A 47 -year-old lady had recently noticed that her heart seems to be racing. She was unable to sleep, increasingly anxious and perspired a lot. Her appetite had increased but her weight reduced. She also noticed that her eyes had become red and that she was troubled with diplopia.
2. A 72-year-old hypertensive male reported the sudden onset of horizontal diplopia. This was worse on looking to the left but not present on looking to the right. On examination he had a reduction on left abduction.
3. A mother took her 2 -year-old son to the GP. She was concerned that the left eye was looking in. The GP confirmed the finding and noted that the eyes seemed to have a normal range of movement.
4. A boy aged 15 years presented to the ophthalmologist because of headache. He had no other visual symptoms. On examination his visual acuity was normal, he was found to have reduced upgaze in both eyes and light-near dissociation was present.
5. A 23-year-old man suffered a head injury when he fell off his motorbike. He reported diplopia on looking to the right and on looking straight ahead.
6. A 43-year-old woman complained of double vision. Objects appeared side by side and the problem appeared worse as the day progressed. Examined in the morning her eye movements appeared full. During the course of the examination it became apparent that an increasing ptosis affected the right eye.

\section*{8. Examination: ocular examination}
a Perimeter
b Direct ophthalmoscopy
c Tonometer
d Cardiff acuity test
e Slit lamp
f Retinoscopy
g Keratometry
h Synoptophore
i Fluorescein angiography
Name the most appropriate instrument to examine the eye.
1. To measure the visual field.
2. To examine the anterior segment of the eye.
3. To measure the intraocular pressure.
4. To examine the circulation of the retinal vessels and detect leakage of blood and its components from these vessels.
5. To measure the shape of the cornea.

\section*{9. Differential diagnosis: gradual loss of vision}
a Cataract
b Macular degeneration
c Optic neuropathy
d Posterior capsule opacification
e Keratoconus
f Vitreous haemorrhage
g Diabetic maculopathy
h Chronic open angle glaucoma
What is the most likely diagnosis in the following situations?
1. A 73-year-old patient reports to her GP that she is having increased difficulty reading road signs and experiences glare in bright lights.
2. A 56-year-old man presents to an ophthalmologist complaining that he has gradually lost vision in the right eye. The vision is $6 / 18$ on the right, $6 / 6$ on the left. Colour vision is reduced on the right. A relative afferent pupillary defect is present and the right optic disc appears pale.
3. A 20 -year-old man is referred to the ophthalmologist by the optometrist because he can no longer fit him with contact lenses. On examination the centre of the cornea is thinned.
4. A 56-year-old patient with diabetes complains of floaters and a reduced visual acuity over a few weeks.
5. An 86 -year-old patient with a previous cataract operation notes increased distortion of vision and a gradual reduction in central visual acuity.

\section*{Useful references}

\section*{Textbooks}

Listed below are some sources that will provide more detailed information about the subjects covered in this book.

\section*{Clinical ophthalmology}

American Academy of Ophthalmology. Basic and Clinical Science Course (BCSC), 2010-2011. (Reviews of ophthalmic subspecialty subjects.)
Easty, D. L. \& Sparrow, J. M. (eds) (1999) Oxford Textbook of Ophthalmology. Oxford University Press. (Large comprehensive textbook from Britain.)
Ehler, J. P., Shah, C. P. \& Fenton G. L. (eds) (2008) The Wills Eye Manual. Fith edition. Lippincott, Williams \& Wilkins. (Concise details on the management of ophthalmic disease.)
Kanski, J. J., Bowling B. (2011) Clinical Ophthalmology. Seventh edition. Elsevier. (Concise illustrated description of ophthalmic disease.)
Kanski, J. J. (2008) Clinical Ophthalmology: a Test Yourself Atlas. Third edition. Butterworth-Heinemann Elsevier. (Test your knowledge with this companion volume.)
Rowe, F. J. (2004) Clinical Orthoptics. Second edition. Blackwell Science. (Outlines the examination and diagnosis of eye movement disorders.)
Spalton, D. J., Hitchings, R. A. \& Hunter, P. A. (2005) Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology. Third edition. Mosby. (Illustrated account of ophthalmic disease.)
Yanoff, M., Duker, J. S. \& Augsburger, J. J. (eds) (2003) Ophthalmology. Second edition. Mosby. (Also available on CD-ROM.) (Large comprehensive textbook from America.)

\section*{Basic science}

Bron, A. J., Tripathi, R. C. \& Tripathi, B. J. (1997) Wolff's Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit. Eighth edition. Chapman \& Hall.
Elkington, A. R. (1999) Clinical Optics. Third edition. Blackwell Science.
Forrester, J. V. et al. (2001) The Eye: Basic Sciences in Practice. Second edition. Saunders.

Snell, R. S. \& Lemp, M. A. (1998) Clinical Anatomy of the Eye. Second edition. Blackwell Science.

\section*{Review journals}

Eye News
Published by Pinpoint Ltd. Provides short practical review articles and information about new developments in ophthalmology.
Survey of Ophthalmology
Published by Elsevier Science. Bi-monthly. Provides in-depth well-referenced review articles on particular topics in ophthalmology.
Progress in Retinal and Eye Research
Published by Elsevier Science. Bi-monthly. Provides in-depth well-referenced review articles on basic science topics in ophthalmology.

\section*{Ophthalmic journals}

For detailed research articles there are numerous ophthalmic publications; most of the subspecialty fields in ophthalmology have their own journal. Among the leaders in clinical ophthalmology are:
American Journal of Ophthalmology
Archives of Ophthalmology
British Journal of Ophthalmology
Eye
Experimental Eye Research
Graefe's Archive for Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology
Ophthalmology
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science (IOVS)
