WHAT IS A COMMUNITY?

A community is a group of people (a large or small group) living in a
certain geographical area and working together for a common goal. They
share the same resources such as water, climatic and geographic
conditions, health services, administration and leadership, as well
as disadvantages such as shortages, risks
and dangers.

The community is made up of individual persons and each of these
individuals belongs to a family all of whom are a part of the larger
community.

Individual

Each individual you know is different and unique. Each has a mixture of
characteristics, some of which they share with others and some of which
are part of a particular culture. Culture is all those things which
people learn, share and pass on to later generations. One of the most
important of these things is language, for it is the means by which
people communicate with one another.

As a health worker you must be able to communicate with individuals in
the community where you work and acquire some knowledge of the language
they speak. It is important to be able to show respect and understanding
for other people and their culture as well as knowing their local
practices like greetings.

Individuals learn beliefs and customs about right and wrong behaviour as
they grow up. For example, in some areas, young people are taught that
dead ancestors can influence the lives of living people. If the
ancestors become angry they can cause disease and misfortune. Therefore,
when you teach such individuals about the effects of germs on
their health status, they may not be convinced and may opt to follow
their traditional beliefs.

Sometimes, people follow both sets of ideas – traditional and modern,
whereby they consult the dispensary for treatment of the symptoms and
return to the traditional healer to get rid of what they think is the
‘real’ cause of the illness. As a community health worker you need to
understand human behaviour and the factors that influence their
behaviour in order to be effective in your community health activities.

An individual can only attain full health if they have wholesome growth.
The place where this wholesome growth can best be cultivated is the
family.

The Family

The family is the smallest recognised group of individuals in a
community. It begins with a marriage union in which husbands and wives
have certain rights and obligations. It is one of the oldest
institutions that mankind has known. It defies time, boundaries,
cultures and human understanding.
It is therefore not surprising that scholars from all over the world who
have studied the family of mankind do not agree on one single definition
of the family. Rather than look at every available definition of the
family, you will consider one which tends to agree on many aspects of
the family.

The family is a group of two or more persons, who share emotional bonds
and material things, usually live in the same household, are related by
blood, marriage or adoption, and sexual relationship is socially
approved for the parents.

The family is a very important social group in community health.
The family provides love, security and a sense of belonging for
individuals from the time they are born. Many of a person’s
characteristics are influenced by their family. For example, a child
learns from their family what behaviour is acceptable in the community
and the language its parents speak. Families have a strong influence on
what each member does.

Often there is an important figure in the family who makes the decisions
or whose opinions are highly valued. The opinion of people in the family
may be more important to a person than the opinion of a health worker.
This has important effects on health behaviour and the use of health
services. For example, in some communities women may not be free to go
to or take their children to a health centre, even if they want to,
because their husbands do not allow them. These are important things to
remember when you advise individuals about a health problem.

Types of Families

There are different types of families in a community

The Nuclear Family

This consists of a husband and a wife with or without children. This
type of family brings forth children (family of procreation). Children
born in this family consider it to be the family of their origin.

The Extended Family

This is also called a joint extended family. This family includes
members of nuclear families and other relatives, aunts, uncles, cousins,
nephews and grandparents.

Single Parent Family

This is formed when one parent brings up children alone either because
of divorce, separation, death or desertion of their spouse.

The Blended Family

This type of family is formed when husband and wife bring into the new
marriage unrelated children from their previous marriages. Cohabitation
and homosexual marriages are also referred to as blended families.

Functions of the Family

The family has many important functions,
these include:

-   Bringing about a sense of togetherness and a balance between
    individual and shared (mutual) action by each family member;
    nurturance and trust; stability and integrity of the group;
    interdependence and the ability to meet demands for survival and
    development

-   Socialising its members into the
    larger community

-   Teaching respect for individual members and their property.
    This includes respect for differences among the family members and
    others

-   Teaching tolerance, fairness and a sense of right or wrong among its
    members and others

-   Caring for its members and developing a sense of trust between and
    among its members

-   Providing an environment for learning and internalising individual
    and gender roles and  Inducing its members to its religious faith
    and teaching respect and tolerance for religious differences

-   Sharing leisure and recreation together

-   Seeking external help from the community for itself and its members

-   Providing security and refuge for its members in times of need

-   Providing a socially sanctioned environment for sexual expression
    amongst married adults

-   Seeking health care for its sick members and providing nursing care
    for its sick, disabled or dependent members

-   Maintaining a healthy home environment conducive to the development
    of its membersresponsibilities

Factors Affecting Family Health

Internal Factors

The internal factors that influence the health of the
family include:

-   Family size

-   Structure

-   Type, members

-   Relationship

-   Biological characteristics and values

External Factors

The external factors which influence the health of a
family include:

-   Family locality

-   Terrain

-   Climate

-   Water supply

-   Air

-   Biological environment (insects, rodents, etc.)

-   Housing and residence

Functions of a Community

Having seen the different components that make up a community, now look
at the functions of the community.

The functions of a community include:

-   Transmitting and sharing information, ideas and beliefs

-   Educating its children about their culture (socialising) and
    welcoming newcomers into the group’s culture (acculturation)

-   Producing and distributing services and goods

-   Providing companionship and support to individual members and
    smaller groups

-   Sharing and utilising space for living, schools, health facilities,
    fields, roads etc.

-   Protecting individual and group rights and welfare

From the previous page, you can see that a community functions as a
medium for the growth and development of its individual members. It
imposes the standards by which the individuals are evaluated, if the
community has high expectations of its members, their performance also
tends to be high. A good community is judged by the kind of people it
produces.

Characteristics of a healthy community

-   Safe and healthy environment free from hazards

-   High standard of personal hygiene

-   Adequate supply of water

-   Adequate and nutritious food

-   Suitable housing

-   Good and harmonious interpersonal relationship

-   Available and accessible health care facility

-   Available and accessible educational, social and recreational
    facilities

-   Gainfull occupational activities

-   Sound communicational infrastructure

-   Communal tackling of problems

Problems affecting the community

-   Unsanity environment

-   Overcrowding

-   Poverty

-   Unclean and inadequate water supply

-   Lack of nutritious food

-   Unsafe environment

-   Epidemic and endemic diseases

-   Illiteracy and ignorance

-   Poor leadership and lack of participation

-   Poor weather conditions

-   Poor infrastructure

-   Political instability

Community Sub-systems

1.  Socio-cultural System

This system is made up of all the customs and beliefs, family and
kinships, leadership and power structures in society. This sub-system
exerts a powerful influence on the lifestyles of the community members,
their priorities and their attitudes and values towards health and
illness.

For example some cultural factors promote either acceptance or stigma
towards a certain illness. High-risk behaviour may be a result of
cultural traditions.

2. Political System

This sub-system is made up of the government and its development
policies as well as political organisations.
If there is political support towards improving health care delivery,
the government provides the mechanism and structure for the planning,
implementation and evaluation of the health care delivery system. The
constitution of Kenya contains a declaration for the elimination of
poverty, ignorance and disease; hence the establishment of the Ministry
of Health and several other ministries.

3. Economic System

The government’s ability to provide health and other services to its
citizens depends on the state of the economy. The poorer the economy of
the country, the more disadvantaged its people will be. Low economic
status is highly associated with malnutrition and communicable diseases.

4. Education System

Education is the main tool of changing behaviour and improving
individual and community health.
Low educational status perpetuates under-development, harmful traditions
and superstitions.

The educational system can be effectively used to pass health related
information and messages that could significantly transform the
perception of the communities on healthy living and prevention of
illnesses.

5. Religious System

The religious system may be a source of health promotion when its values
and teachings positively influence lifestyles and healthy behaviour, for
example, forbidding smoking, alcohol consumption, pre-marital and
extra-marital sex.
On the other hand, religious teachings may promote ill health, for
example, by forbidding the followers from seeking treatment in
hospitals.

6. Environmental System

Environmental sanitation is one of the leading promoters of individual
and community health. Clean water supply, proper disposal of waste and
adequate housing are key to community wellness. Environmental pollution
is a cause of various illnesses.

7. Communication and Transport System

Communication includes all the means of contacting and exchanging
information with one another such as roads, bridges, railroad,
telephone, television, radio, computers, internet, fax, and postal
services.

The communication system is important in spreading health messages.
Transport aids in communication by moving people from place to place.

8. Health Care system

The health care system exists to provide promotive, preventive, curative
and rehabilitative services in hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, health
centres, dispensaries, and through special health projects and programs.

The health care system is enhanced through linkages that bring together
the government, non-governmental organisations, private institutions and
individuals in providing continuous and comprehensive health services.
These linkages strengthen the multi-sectoral approach of achieving
health for all.

Concept of Community Health

Community health is the science and art of promoting health and
preventing diseases through organised community participation.

Examples of community health activities

-   Health education, counseling and training of health workers

-   Community health assessment and diagnosis

-   Envinmental sanitation

-   Supply of clean water

-   Food hygiene and security

-   Personal hygiene

-   Vector and pest control

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Prenatal services

-   Family planning services

-   CHW services

-   School health services

-   Home visiting and Home Bases Nursing

-   Occupational nursing

-   Care of disable, elderly, disadvantaged and chronically ill

-   Intersectional collaboration

The term ‘community health’ is also referred to as:

-   Population medicine

-   Social medicine

-   Community medicine

-   Preventive medicine

Aims of Community Health

Community health aims to achieve the following:

-   Improved sanitation in the environment

-   Prioritisation of the community’s needs

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Health education to promote healthy behaviour and practices

-   Early diagnosis and prevention of disease

-   Disease surveillance

-   Case/contact tracing and treatment

-   Empowerment of all individuals to realise their rights and
    responsibilities for the attainment of good health for all

The main goals of community health are to:

-   Identify community health problems and needs

-   Plan ways of meeting community health needs

-   Implement activities geared towards meeting the community health
    needs

-   Evaluate the impact of community health services/activities

Aims of Community Health

A successful community health programme is one in which the community
and health care providers collaborate to achieve the following benefits:

-   Increased life expectancy (life span) of every individual

-   Decreased mortality rates particularly of mothers and children

-   Decreased morbidity rates from all causes

-   An increase in the total well being (physical, mental and social) of
    every individual

-   An increase in the quality of life for all people

-   Overall social and economic development of the population

-   Equitable distribution of resources

What examples of community health activities

Concept of Family Health Care

Family health care is a holistic approach to the achievement of
wholesome health for the family.

Aims of Family Health Care

-   Identifying and appraising health problems of the family

-   Providing health education for the promotion of health and
    prevention of diseases

-   Sharing health information with the family to enable members to
    understand and accept health problems

-   Providing community health nursing services according to the needs
    of the family

-   Helping the family to develop competence at assessing their health
    problems and at carrying out remedial health action through health
    education, instructions and demonstrations

-   Contributing needed materials for personal and social development of
    family members

-   Helping and encouraging the family members to utilise available
    resources to maintain all aspects of the health of the family

Principles and Process of Family Health Care

In order for you to work successfully with a family and achieve your
goals of promoting health and preventing disease, you must observe the
following principles:

-   Establish a good working relationship with the family

-   Plan relevant health education and sharing of clear health messages,
    which will guide them on how to take care
    of themselves

-   Gather relevant information about the family which will enable them
    to identify health problems and set priorities

-   Provide need-based support and services to the family regardless of
    sex, age, income, and religion, in order to improve their health
    status

-   Work in collaboration with other health service agencies to avoid
    duplicating family health care

Principles and Process of Family Health Care

-   To succeed in your family health care activities, following these
    principles alone is not enough. You also need to employ the nursing
    process approach in the care of families.

  Step 1: Assessment

-   You need to assess the family so as to identify (diagnose) the
    family health problems, needs and resources.
    This involves collecting data using interviews, observation,
    communication, subjective appraisal, and reviewing available records
    and reports.

Step 2: Planning

-   This involves planning for health action by choosing effective and
    affordable alternatives and setting priorities after considering the
    available internal and external resources. You should work
    hand-in-hand with the family members at all stages of planning.

  Step 3: Implementation

-   You should implement the interventions or health actions agreed with
    the family members. Implementing also includes increasing the
    family’s ability to function effectively and removing barriers to
    health care as well as assisting the family to do those things which
    they cannot do by themselves.

  Step 4: Evaluation

-   This involves evaluating or measuring whether the expected outcome
    has been achieved. If no achievements have been made, find out what
    factors interfered and change your approach accordingly.

Home Visiting

Assessment is the first step in the process approach to family health
care, but when do you carry out this assessment?
You could assess family members when they visit your health facility.
However, in order to get a comprehensive picture of a family’s health,
you need to visit them at home. Home visits are an important part of
your work as a community health nurse as they allow you to see families
and their needs in their own homes.

Home visiting is one of the essential community health services that you
should provide. It has two main purposes:

-   It allows you to follow up individual families at home to find out
    why some health problems persist in the community despite efforts to
    prevent or control them, for example malnutrition, communicable
    diseases, or repeated failure to attend clinics, especially if the
    family is at risk

-   It keeps you aware of what is going on in your
    catchment area

In order for you to conduct home visiting successfully, you need to have
the following skills:

-   Good technical skills and knowledge of preventive and therapeutic
    measures

-   Good communication skills and
    teaching ability

-   Good leadership skills and rational thinking to make sound judgments

-   Good counselling skills and an understanding of human relations

During home visits you act on your own, making decisions on the spot and
carrying them out.
You need to be prepared. When planning and implementing home visits, you
should be guided by some basic principles in order to make a success of
it.

Principles of a home visiting

-   Planned and benefit to the patient

-   Purposeful, clear and meet patient needs

-   Regular, flexible and according to patient needs

-   Educative to patient

-   Used to demonstrate principle of health

-   Convenience and acceptable to patient

-   Respect the patient rights

-   Recorded in case file

The Process of Home Visiting

The process of home visiting is carried out in five phases.

Entry or Initiation Phase

The community health nurse shares information with the patient on the
reason and purposes for home visits.
This interaction may occur in a hospital ward or at a clinic.

Pre-visit Activities

Before the actual home visit, you have to look for information regarding
the patient and the family. You also need to gather information
regarding the location of the house, distance from your health facility
and the physical address. During pre-visit activities, you should
investigate the community resources, assemble supplies and prepare for
the first contact with the patient at their doorstep.

Activities During Home Visiting

This is the working phase during which you put into action your planned
health activities. During this phase you must establish trust and
rapport with the patient and the family so that there can be a positive
interpersonal relationship
(a professional nurse-patient relationship). This relationship will
enhance the achievement of the mutually determined health-oriented
goals.

Termination Phase of Visit

This occurs when the health oriented goals have been met. Termination of
home visits can occur due to any of the following reasons:

-   The patients’ health has been restored and the patient can function
    without the nurse

-   The patient has changed their residence

-   The community health nurse has transferred the patients’ care to
    another nurse or agency

Post-visit Activities

-   Post-visit activities include recording and reporting important
    events of the home visits, and sharing the reports with the
    appropriate authorities and individuals about the patient family.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Home Visiting

-   There are many good nursing reasons (advantages) for carrying out
    home visiting. Though the activity does have its disadvantages, they
    are quite insignificant compared to its advantages. You should
    therefore try to overcome them through careful planning so that they
    do not prevent you from carrying out this important activity.

Advantages of home visiting

-   Accurate assessment of family

-   Observe physical environment

-   Identify barriers to community health

-   Use realistic resources

-   Active participation

-   Implement planned care

-   Learn about the home and family state

-   Give health massage to the family

-   Good image of the nurse

-   Clarify doubt and misconception

-   Observe and appreciate family practice

Disadvantages of a home visit

-   Time consuming

-   Expensive

-   Energy consuming

-   Unforeseen events can occur

-   Rejection by the family

-   Confusion of the nurse role

Principles of Community Health

Before you explore the principles of community health, first look at the
definition of the word ‘principle’. A principle can be defined as

A basic belief, theory, or rule that has a major influence on the way in
which something is done.
- Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced
Learners (2002)

Principles are the basic ideas of conduct or rules of action.
They provide the community health nurse with a clear and rational
framework to guide their work.

Principles of community health by Alma Ala declaration 1978

-   Availability of health care for all

-   Affordability of health care

-   Promoteve and preventive aspect of health care

-   Integrate curative and preventive

-   Active participation of individual

-   Utilize the available resources in the community

-   Inter-secterial approach

So far you have looked at the principles of community health.
Now look at the principles of community health nursing.

-   Community health nursing services should be available to all,
    according to their health needs regardless of sex, age, culture,
    religion, social or economic status, race, political affiliation,
    ethnicity or nationality.

-   A community health nursing programme must have clearly defined
    objectives and purposes for its services.

-   Community health nursing should not be a vertical programme. A
    community health nurse must work with other stakeholders in the
    development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
    community health programme. 

-   Community health nursing should involve the community right through
    the planning implementation and evaluation of the programme.

-   The community health service should build the capacity of the
    community to run their own health programme for the purpose of
    sustainability. These include training of the Communities Own
    Resource Persons (CORPs).

-   Health education and counselling for the individual, family and
    community are integral parts of community health nursing. 

-   Community health nursing services should be based on the identified
    needs of the patient and there should be continuity of services to
    the patient. 

-   Community health nursing should work within the community’s culture
    and norms without compromising professionalism.

-   Community health nursing is a service and there should therefore be
    no room to demand favours, gifts or bribes from clients. 

-   Community health nursing is dynamic and the nurses should therefore
    actively participate in continuing professional development so as to
    keep abreast with new developments.

-   Community health nursing services should develop proper guidelines
    and maintain proper records and reports.

The Roles and Functions of a Community Health Nurse

As a nurse, you have achieved the right to perform your duties through
merit (formal training). You are trained to play a certain part as a
member of a health team which is bound by the legal and moral
expectations of your profession. This is what you call your role.
In your role as a nurse, you have developed ideas about what is
appropriate to say or do within this role. The role of the community
health nurse is to prevent illness and maximise the health of
individuals in the community.

Your function, on the other hand, refers to the job that you are
expected to perform as a nurse. That is, the broad areas of
responsibility which you assume as a nurse. Your functions as a nurse
may vary according to your training, experience, and designation. The
functions of a community health nurse are many and emanate from your
role.

Roles and functions of a community health nurse

-   Implementer

-   Advocate

-   Advisor

-   Health educator

-   Assessor and identifier

-   Planner

-   Evaluator

-   Researcher

-   Trainer
