INTRODUCTION TO COMMUNITY HEALTH

By the end of this Lesson the student will be able to:

-   Describe the concept of community health nursing

-   Describe the principles of community health nursing

-   Explain the role of a community health nurse in the provision of
    health care

-   Describe the organisational structure of the Ministry of Health

-   Explain the health sector reforms

  What is a Community?

A community is a group of people (a large or small group) living in a
certain geographical area and working together for a common goal. They
share the same resources such as water, climatic and geographic
conditions, health services, administration and leadership, as well as
disadvantages such as shortages, risks and dangers.

The community is made up of individual persons and each of these
individuals belongs to a family. The functions of a community include:

-   Transmitting and sharing information, ideas and beliefs

-   Educating its children about their culture (socialising) and
    welcoming newcomers into the group’s culture (acculturation)

-   Producing and distributing services and goods

-   Providing companionship and support to individual members and
    smaller groups

-   Sharing and utilising space for living, schools, health facilities,
    fields, roads etc.

-   Protecting individual and group rights and welfare

Characteristics of a Healthy Community

-   Safe and healthy environment, relatively free from natural and
    man-made hazards

-   Community members have high standards of personal hygiene

-   Adequate supply of wholesome water

-   Availability of adequate nutritious food

-   Suitable housing

-   Harmonious interpersonal relationships among members

-   Availability and accessibility of health care facilities

-   Availability and accessibility of suitable educational, social and
    recreational facilities

-   Gainful occupational activities (availability of stable or reliable
    sources of income)

-   Sound communication infrastructure

-   Communal approach to and participation in tackling community
    problems

Problems that Affect the Health of the Community

-   Unsanitary environment

-   Overcrowding

-   Poverty

-   Unclean and inadequate water supply

-   Lack of nutritious food

-   Unsafe environment

-   Epidemic and endemic disease

-   Unstable family life

-   Illiteracy and ignorance

-   Poor leadership and lack of participation

-   Adverse weather conditions

-   Poor infrastructure

-   Political instability

COMMUNITY SUB-SYSTEMS

A community has eight essential sub-systems, which interact and
interrelate continuously.

Socio-cultural System

This system is made up of all the customs and beliefs, family and
kinships, leadership and power structures in society. This sub-system
exerts a powerful influence on the lifestyles of the community members,
their priorities and their attitudes and values towards health and
illness.

For example some cultural factors promote either acceptance or stigma
towards a certain illness. High-risk behaviour may be a result of
cultural traditions

Economic System

The government’s ability to provide health and other services to its
citizens depends on the state of the economy. The poorer the economy of
the country, the more disadvantaged its people will be. Low economic
status is highly associated with malnutrition and communicable diseases

Political System

This sub-system is made up of the government and its development
policies as well as political organisations.
If there is political support towards improving health care delivery,
the government provides the mechanism and structure for the planning,
implementation and evaluation of the health care delivery system. The
constitution of Kenya contains a declaration for the elimination of
poverty, ignorance and disease; hence the establishment of the Ministry
of Health and several other ministries

Education System

Education is the main tool of changing behaviour and improving
individual and community health.
Low educational status perpetuates under-development, harmful traditions
and superstitions.

The educational system can be effectively used to pass health related
information and messages that could significantly transform the
perception of the communities on healthy living and prevention of
illnesses

Religious System

The religious system may be a source of health promotion when its values
and teachings positively influence lifestyles and healthy behaviour, for
example, forbidding smoking, alcohol consumption, pre-marital and
extra-marital sex.
On the other hand, religious teachings may promote ill health, for
example, by forbidding the followers from seeking treatment in hospitals

Environmental System

Environmental sanitation is one of the leading promoters of individual
and community health. Clean water supply, proper disposal of waste and
adequate housing are key to community wellness. Environmental pollution
is a cause of various illnesses.

Communication and Transport System

Communication includes all the means of contacting and exchanging
information with one another such as roads, bridges, railroad,
telephone, television, radio, computers, internet, fax, and postal
services.

The communication system is important in spreading health messages.
Transport aids in communication by moving people from place to place

Health Care system

The health care system exists to provide promotive, preventive, curative
and rehabilitative services in hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, health
centres, dispensaries, and through special health projects and programs.

The health care system is enhanced through linkages that bring together
the government, non-governmental organisations, private institutions and
individuals in providing continuous and comprehensive health services.
These linkages strengthen the multi-sectoral approach of achieving
health for all.

COMMUNITY HEALTH

Community health is the science and art of promoting health and
preventing diseases through organized community participation

Aims of Community Health

Community health aims to achieve the following:

-   Improved sanitation in the environment

-   Prioritisation of the community’s needs

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Health education to promote healthy behaviour and practices

-   Early diagnosis and prevention of disease

-   Disease surveillance

-   Case/contact tracing and treatment

-   Empowerment of all individuals to realise their rights and
    responsibilities for the attainment of good health for all

The main goals of community health are to:

-   Identify community health problems and needs

-   Plan ways of meeting community health needs

-   Implement activities geared towards meeting the community health
    needs

-   Evaluate the impact of community health services/activities

Aims of Community Health

A successful community health programme is one in which the community
and health care providers collaborate to achieve the following benefits:

-   Increased life expectancy (life span) of every individual

-   Decreased mortality rates particularly of mothers and children

-   Decreased morbidity rates from all causes

-   An increase in the total well being (physical, mental and social) of
    every individual

-   An increase in the quality of life for all people

-   Overall social and economic development of the population

-   Equitable distribution of resources

Examples of Community Health Activities

-   Health education, counselling, and the training of other health
    workers

-   Community health assessment and diagnosis

-   Information, education and communication

-   Environmental sanitation and supply of adequate clean water

-   Food hygiene and household food security

-   Personal hygiene

-   Vector and pest control

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Provision of prenatal services to pregnant women

-   Provision of family planning services

-   Provision of child health/welfare services for children under five
    years old

-   Provision of school health services

-   Home visiting and home-based nursing care

-   Occupational/industrial health

-   Care of the disabled, the elderly, the disadvantaged, the
    chronically ill

-   Inter-sectoral collaboration

PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNITY HEALTH

A basic belief, theory, or rule that has a major influence on the way in
which something is done. - Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced
Learners (2002).

Principles of Community Health (Alma Ata Declaration - WHO 1978)

-   Availability of health care for all people and at a cost they can
    afford

-   Promotive and preventive aspects of health care

-   Integration of curative and preventive services

-   Active participation of individuals and communities in the planning
    and provision of care

-   Development of maximum potential for self-care

-   Utilisation of all levels and types of community manpower

-   Inter-sectoral approach

Principles of Community Health (Hentsch - 1985)

-   Health care should be shaped around the life patterns of the
    population. It should meet the needs of the community.

-   Primary health care should be an integral part of the national
    health system.

-   Health care activities should be fully integrated with the
    activities of the other sectors involved in community development
    such as agriculture, education, public works, housing and
    communication.

-   The local population should be actively involved in the formulation
    and implementation of health care activities, so that health care
    can be brought into line with local needs and priorities.

-   The health care offered should place a maximum reliance on available
    community resources, especially those that have hither to remained
    untapped and should remain within the cost limitations relevant to
    each country.

-   The majority of interventions should be undertaken at the most
    peripheral practice level of the health services and by the workers
    most suitably trained for performing these activities.

Principles of Community Health Nursing

-   Community health nursing services should be available to all,
    according to their health needs regardless of sex, age, culture,
    religion, social or economic status, race, political affiliation,
    ethnicity or nationality.

-   A community health nursing programme must have clearly defined
    objectives and purposes for its services.

-   Community health nursing should not be a vertical programme. A
    community health nurse must work with other stakeholders in the
    development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
    community health programme.

-   Community health nursing should involve the community right through
    the planning implementation and evaluation of the programme.

-   The community health service should build the capacity of the
    community to run their own health programme for the purpose of
    sustainability. These include training of the Communities Own
    Resource Persons (CORPs).

-   Health education and counselling for the individual, family and
    community are integral parts of community health nursing.

-   Community health nursing services should be based on the identified
    needs of the patient and there should be continuity of services to
    the patient.

-   Community health nursing should work within the community’s culture
    and norms without compromising professionalism.

-   Community health nursing is a service and there should therefore be
    no room to demand favours, gifts or bribes from clients.

-   Community health nursing is dynamic and the nurses should therefore
    actively participate in continuing professional development so as to
    keep abreast with new developments.

-   Community health nursing services should develop proper guidelines
    and maintain proper records and reportse Roles

Roles and Functions of a Community Health Nurse

-   and Functions of a Community Health Nurse

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Roles                 Functions
  --------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  Manager               Organising and managing health care programs, being a
                        team leader for nursing and supervising community health
                        nursing activities.

  Implementer           Implementing community health action/programs in
                        collaboration with the other stakeholders in community
                        health. Creating community awareness and interest in
                        their health. Developing the community’s ability to
                        assess their health status and resources. Sharing
                        knowledge and skills with the community on how to improve
                        their health and to prevent illness.

  Advocator             Advise the health care providers, planners and other
                        agencies on the needs/problems of the community.

  Advisor               Sharing technical health information with individual
                        families and communities.

  Health educator       Teaching individuals and families how to prevent disease
                        and improve
                        their health.

  Assessor/Identifier   Assessing the health status of the community. Identifying
                        existing and potential health needs/problems and
                        resources in the community.

  Planner               Planning for health action with the other health team
                        members and
                        community members.

  Evaluator             Evaluating the performance and the outcome of community
                        health activities.

  Researcher            Carrying out surveys, studies and research to identify
                        problems related to your work.

  Trainer               Training other community health workers, both designated
                        and voluntary community-based health workers.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

DEFINITION OF PHC

In 1978, the Alma Ata international conference on PHC defined primary
health care as:

'Essential health care based on practical, scientifically sound and
socially acceptable methods and technology, made universally accessible
to individuals and families in the community through their full
participation, and at a cost that the community and country can afford
to maintain at every stage of their development in the spirit of
self-reliance and self-determination.
In addition, it forms an integral part both of the country’s health
system, of which it is the central function and main focus, and of the
overall social and economic development of the community. It is the
first level of contact of individuals, the family and the community with
the national health system, bringing health care as close as possible to
where people live and work'.

From the definition, you need to note the following key statements which
identify PHC as essential health care. These are:

-   PHC is universally accessible to individuals and families in the
    community.

-   PHC is socially acceptable to all, meaning that the health care is
    appropriate and adequate in quality to satisfy the health needs of
    people, and is provided by methods acceptable to them within their
    social cultural norms.

-   PHC is affordable, that is, whatever methods of payment used, the
    services should be at a price the community can afford.

-   PHC promotes full participation of individual, families and
    communities.

-   PHC is appropriate technology that is, the use of methods and
    technology which use locally available supplies and equipments.

CONCEPT OF PHC

-   Accessibility

-   Affordability

-   Availability

-   Appropriate technology

-   Acceptability

The Seven Pillars of PHC

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Aspect           Definition            Comment
  ---------------- --------------------- --------------------------------------
  Health System    Primary Health Care.  The first elements of a continuing
                                         health care process, sustained by
                                         integrated, functional and mutually
                                         support referral systems, leading to
                                         the progressive improvement of the
                                         comprehensive health care for all, and
                                         giving priority to those in most need.

  Priority         Essential health      Addresses main health care problems in
                   problems.             the community providing promotive,
                                         preventive, curative and
                                         rehabilitative services.

  Science          Practical,            Based on application of the relevant
                   scientifically sound. results of social, biomedical and
                                         health services research.

  Culture          Socially acceptable   Reflects and evolves from the economic
                   methods and           conditions and socio-cultural and
                   technology.           political characteristics of the
                                         country and communities.

  Equity           Made universally      The attainment of health care for all
                   accessible to         people of the world by the year 2000
                   individuals and       and beyond, of the level of health
                   families.             that would permit them to lead
                                         socially and economically productive
                                         lives. The existing gross inequality
                                         in the health status of the people
                                         particularly between developing
                                         countries, as well as within countries
                                         is politically, socially and
                                         economically unacceptable.

  Participatory    Through their full    The people have the right and duty to
                   participation.        participate individually and
                                         collectively, in the planning and
                                         implementation of health care.

  Sustainability   At a cost that the    To exercise political will to mobilise
                   community can afford  the country’s resources and to use
                   to maintain at every  available external resources
                   stage of their        rationally.
                   development in the    
                   spirit of             
                   self-reliance and     
                   self-determination.   
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

PHC is a strategy of health care delivery which creates a partnership
between the consumer of the health services and health care
professionals. They both actively participate in the achievement of the
common goal of improved health

Key players include the government, non-governmental organizations,
Primary Health Care workers and community members, amongst others

Fundamentals of PHC

Fundamentals of PHC are basic rules or beliefs that are essential to the
existence, development or success of Primary Health Care.

1.  PHC reflects and evolves from the economic conditions and
    socio-cultural and political characteristics of the country and the
    communities, and is based on the application of the relevant results
    of social, biomedical and health services research and public health
    experience.

PHC addresses the main health problems in the community, providing promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative services accordingly. 

2.  PHC includes, at least: education concerning prevailing health
    problems and the methods of preventing and controlling them; an
    adequate supply of safe water and basic sanitation; maternal and
    child care including family planning; immunisation against the major
    infectious diseases; prevention and control of locally endemic
    diseases; appropriate treatment of common diseases and injuries and
    provision of essential drugs.

3.  PHC involves, in addition to the health sector, other sectors such
    as agriculture, animal husbandry, food industry, education, housing,
    public works, communication and other sectors. It demands the
    coordinated efforts of all these sectors.

4.  PHC requires and promotes maximum community and individual
    self-reliance and participation in the planning, organization,
    operation and control of health services, making fullest use of
    local, national and other available resources. Through appropriate
    education the communities themselves are empowered to participate.

5.  PHC should be sustained by integral, functional and mutually
    supportive referral systems leading to the progressive improvement
    of comprehensive health care for all, and giving priority to those
    most in need.

6.  At local and referral levels, PHC relies on health workers,
    including physicians, nurses, midwives, auxiliaries and community
    workers, as well as traditional practitioners who are suitably
    trained both socially and technically, to work as a health team and
    to respond to the expressed health needs of the community

ELEMENTS OF PHC

In the Alma Ata conference of 1978, eight essential elements of PHC were
identified. However, individual countries were given the liberty to add
any other elements they felt were relevant to their own country. Kenya
has added other elements

The PHC elements listed at the Alma Ata Declaration were as follows:

1.  Education concerning prevailing health problems and the methods of
    preventing and controlling them

2.  Local disease control

3.  Expanded programme of immunisation

4.  Maternal and child health care and family planning

5.  Essential drug supply

6.  Nutrition and adequate food supply

7.  Treatment and prevention of common diseases and injuries

8.  Safe water supply and good sanitation

Use the acronym 'ELEMENTS' to help you remember these eight elements.

The Kenyan government has added additional PHC elements to the ones
identified at the Alma Ata conference These are:

-   Mental health

-   Dental health

-   Community based rehabilitation

-   Malaria control

-   STI and HIV/AIDS prevention and control

  Health Education

-   Health education is education that is intended to have a positive
    impact on health. It is a process of dialogue with community members
    to find out appropriate responses to health problems, as well as to
    empower them with the knowledge and insight they need, to understand
    how their behaviour affects their health.

-   Health education today has extended its scope beyond disease
    prevention and control to health promotion. It gives individuals and
    communities the incentive to promote the conditions that maintain
    good health.

-   You can see that health education is an integral part of all health
    services, all health personnel including yourself have an important
    role to play in organising appropriate health educational programmes
    at all levels in the community.

  Promotion of Food Supply and Proper Nutrition

-   Nutritional deficiency states are particularly noticeable among
    pregnant and lactating mothers, infants and children. This may be
    due to the prevailing cultural or economic factors in the community.

-   As a community health nurse, it is your responsibility to take
    suitable measures to prevent and treat diarrhoea diseases,
    intestinal parasites and other diseases, which lead to nutritional
    deficiency states. It is also your responsibility to support health
    promotional measures such as child spacing, nutrition education,
    kitchen garden and food hygiene. In coordination with other sectors,
    you should also encourage community members to grow more foods,
    prevent post harvest spoilage through construction of simple food
    stores, and to keep poultry and dairy cattle.

Water Supply and Basic Sanitation

Safe water and sanitation is not available to a major section of our
population, yet, it is essential for life. Many water borne diseases
which are prevalent in the community can be prevented if ommunities gain
access to safe water and adopt proper refuse and faecal disposal.

So under this element, effort is being made to bring together the
different factors from related sectors to survey and identify sources of
safe water and carry out proper analysis of the water. At the same time,
community health workers should educate community members on how to
protect wells and springs from contamination, how to construct latrines,
compositing facilities and soakage pits.

Maternal and Child Health and Family Planning

Children make up one-half of the community and their mothers another
fifth. On numbers alone, health care for mothers and children forms the
greater part of community health. Mothers and children also run a great
risk of injury and disease because their lives are concerned with
beginnings and growth. MCH/FP services are therefore aimed at promoting
the health of mothers and children, by reducing the maternal and child
mortality rates, and enabling women of childbearing age to have the
desired number of pregnancies and at the right interval. MCH/FP care has
the following four main functions:

-   Antenatal care / Prenatal care

-   Perinatal care

-   Postnatal care

-   Family planning4. PHC involves, in addition to the health sector,
    other sectors such as
    agriculture, animal husbandry, food industry, education, housing,
    public works,
    communication and other sectors. It demands the coordinated efforts
    of all
    these sectors.
    5. PHC requires and promotes maximum community and individual
    self-reliance
    and participation in the planning, organisation, operation and
    control of health
    services, making fullest use of local, national and other available
    resources.
    Through appropriate education the communities themselves are
    empowered
    to participate.

6. PHC should be sustained by integral, functional and mutually
supportive
referral systems leading to the progressive improvement of comprehensive
health care for all, and giving priority to those most in need.
7. At local and referral levels, PHC relies on health workers, including
physicians,
nurses, midwives, auxiliaries and community workers, as well as
traditional
practitioners who are suitably trained both socially and technically, to
work as
a health team and to respond to the expressed health needs of the
community.

Immunisation

Kenya has for some time now implemented immunisation activities through
the Kenya Expanded Programme on Immunisation (KEPI).

Immunisation is a very effective means of primary prevention against
certain endemic and epidemic diseases. Kenya has a long history of
immunisation programmes.

Health workers have been trained on how to motivate and encourage
mothers to bring their children for immunisation, as well as how to
identify suspected cases of immunisable diseases such as, measles,
poliomyelitis and neonatal tetanus, using standardised case definition
(disease surveillance

Local Disease Control

There are many endemic diseases in this country, some of which are
confined to particular areas. Can you remember what an endemic disease
is?

Treatment and Prevention of Common Diseases and Injuries

Curative care is important in its own right as it provides a powerful
mechanism for teaching preventive and promotive care.

Supply of Essential Drugs

Essential drugs are basic drugs used to treat minor ailments or
conditions at the dispensary and health centre levels.

Kenya has been a pioneer in the establishment of an effective drug kits
system which regularly delivers drugs to health units.

Community pharmacies have also been established in remote rural areas to
improve access to drugs in the community.

As a community health nurse you have a major responsibility in ensuring
that patients have access to essential drugs and know how to manage
their drug regimens for optimal effect

PRINCIPLES OF PHC

Equitable Distribution

Equity is the fair and reasonable distribution of available resources to
all individuals and families so that they can meet their fundamental and
basic needs. Services should be physically, socially and financially
accessible to everyone. People with similar needs should have equal
access to similar health services.
To ensure equal access, the distribution of resources and coverage of
Primary Health Care services should be greatest in those areas with the
greatest need. This principle should be taken into account when deciding
on the location of new health facilities, outreach services points, or
during introduction of new health programmes, especially those that
require payment for services.

Manpower Development

Primary Health Care aims at mobilising the human potential of the entire
community by making use of available resources. This principle
facilitates the identification and deployment of the necessary health
personnel as well as the training and development of new categories of
health workers to serve the community. Comprehensive PHC requires health
workers to identify solutions that involve the community, as follows:

1.  It is not enough to provide oral rehydration solution and medical
    treatment to a sick child with diarrhoea. Maintaining the health of
    the child also requires providing family education on child care and
    environmental hygiene, as well as improving access to food.

2.  In addition to counselling on breast feeding, growth monitoring,
    nutrition rehabilitation, and child care, a nutrition program should
    promote weaning foods that are available locally.

3.  PHC services for healthy people (prenatal care, immunisation, health
    education) should be established as soon as possible through
    community based health interventions

Community Participation

Community participation is the process by which individuals, families
and communities assume responsibility in promoting their own health and
welfare. The PHC strategy underlines the importance of full community
participation, especially in health decision making. Community members
and health providers need to work together in partnership to seek
solutions to the complex health problems facing communities today. In
addition to the health sector, families and communities need to get
actively involved in taking care of their own health. Communities should
participate in the following:

Creating and preserving a healthy environment

-   Maintaining preventive and promotive health activities

-   Sharing information about their needs and wants with higher
    authorities

-   Implementing health care priorities and managing clinics and
    hospitals

Appropriate technology

Appropriate technology is the kind of technology that is scientifically
or technically sound and adaptable to local needs, and which the
community can afford to maintain at every stage of their development in
the spirit of self-reliance and self-determination. It includes issues
of costs and affordability of services, type of equipment and their
pattern of distribution throughout the community. An increasing
complexity in health care methods should be observed upward in the PHC
pyramid (see graphic). Care givers should be trained to deliver services
using the most appropriate and cost effective methods and equipment for
their level of care.

Multi-Sectoral or Intersectoral Approach

PHC requires a coordinated effort with other health related sectors
whose activities impact on health. For example, agriculture, water and
sanitation, transportation, education, etc. This is necessary to achieve
social and economic development of a population.
The health sector should lead this effort.

The commitment of all sectors may increase if the purpose for joint
action and the role of each sector is made clear to all concerned.
Lessons drawn from past experience clearly indicate that the health
sector cannot achieve much in isolation. It must work in close
collaboration with other sectors in the community in order to succeed in
promoting the community’s health and self-reliance.

Summary

This is what you need to remember about the principles of PHC.

-   Every individual has a right to a high quality of life.

-   The community must be allowed to take charge of the resources
    available from both within and outside their environment. This
    empowers them to be more responsible and accountable for their
    quality of life.

-   There should be equitable distribution of resources among the
    community members so that they can meet their fundamental and basic
    needs

Health Promotion and Prevention - PHC requires a comprehensive approach
that is based on the following interventions:

-   Promotive - addresses basic causes of ill health at the level of
    society. Preventive - reduces the incidence of disease by addressing
    the immediate and underlying causes at the individual level

-   Curative - reduces the prevalence of disease by stopping the
    progression of disease among the sick

-   Rehabilitative - reduces the long term effects or complications of a
    health problem

Comprehensive PHC combines facility based health services (curative and
rehabilitative) with multi-sectoral public health interventions
(promotive and preventive).

Because this approach is more effective in sustaining the overall
wellbeing of a population, it should be supported by the community

ORGANIZATION OF HEALTH SERVICES IN KENYA

Headquarters Level

At headquarter level, the Ministry of Health (MOH) is responsible for
setting policy, coordinating activities of government and
non-governmental organisations, managing the implementation of policy
changes regarding government services, such as user charges, monitoring
and evaluating the impact of policy changes

County Level

At the county level, the roles of the county Medical Officer of Health
(PMOH) and members of the County Health Management Team (PHMT), are to
act as a strong intermediary between the central ministry and districts,
and to oversee the implementation of health policy (maintenance of
standards of quality, performance, coordination, regulation and control
of all health services in the public and private sectors in their areas
of jurisdiction).

The role of the CMOH and PHMT with regard to the cost sharing programme,
is to issue Authority to Incur Expenditure (AIEs), guide, monitor and
supervise the District Medical Officers of Health (DMOHs) and facility
managers in the province, in the management of cost sharing activities.

CMOs are ex-officio members of the District Health Management Boards
(DHMBs) in their counties. They receive copies of all minutes of DHMB
meetings and all long term plans for the district approved by the board.
The boards should inform them of any suspected irregularities in the
running of district health services

District Level

At the district level, the DHMBs oversee all health sector activities,
their functions are not limited to the management of cost sharing funds.
The government established DHMBs with representatives of consumers and
other interested groups, to ensure prudent use of such funds.

Following the health sector reforms the above system changed. Kenya
constitution now has counties and not provinces. The new reforms
include:

KENYA ESSENTIAL PACKAGE FOR HEALTH (KEPH)

-   What is KEPH?

This is an essential care made universally accessible to all Kenyans (to
all 6 life cohorts provided in the six levels of care.)

-   Rationale for KEPH

To increase accessibility and utilization of quality health services to
the community in order to achieve mid/long term targets.

Organization OF KEPH

-   The Kenya health system is organized at six inter-linked levels: ( 6
    levels of care)

    -   National Level = Tertiary Hospitals

    -   County level =Secondary hospitals

    -   District level =Primary Hospitals

    -   Sub-district level=Health centres, maternities

    -   Dispensary level=Dispensaries ,clinics

INTERFACE

Community level= Community,village,HH

DEPARTMENTALIZATION OF KEPH at MOPHS and MOMS Hqs

KEPH is delivered through departmentalization of health care delivery
i.e

1. Preventive care services

2. Promotive care services

3. Curative care services

4. Rehabilitative care services

Preventive and promotive services

They departments are head by Directors of Divisions Preventive and
promotive divisions Include:

-   Division of Reproductive health

-   Division of vaccines and immunizations

-   Division of Malaria Control

-   NASCOP

Curative and Rehabilitative services

Divisions/departments under curative and rehabilitative include:

-   Radiographic services

-   Health Care financing

-   Division of nursing

-   Division of dental health

-   Governmnent Chemist

-   Division mental health

-   Division of non communicable diseases

-   Occupational health services

-   Physiotherapy services

-   Division of clinical services

-   National Blood transfusion services

-   Orthopedic Technical Services

-   Division of Biomedical Engineering and maintenance services

-   Division of pharmacy

KEPH’s Six Life Cohorts

KEPH is delivered to the citizens through the following cohorts:

1.  Pregnancy, delivery and new born –first 2 weeks of life

2.  Childhood (2 weeks to 5 years)

3.  Late childhood ( 6-12 years)

4.  Youth and adolescents (13-24)

5.  Adults ( 25-59 yrs)

6.  Elderly ( > 60 yrs)

Functions of the Ministry of Health

-   Planning (for the delivery of health care services)

-   Maintaining effective health information systems

-   Manpower training, recruitment and development

-   Promotive and preventive services

-   Curative services

-   Health care financing

-   Registration and licensing of health facilities

-   Health care policy development

-   Health care quality assurance

The Ministry of Health operates at four main levels, which are based on
our country's administrative setup. The four levels are:

-   National (Central)

-   County /county

-   District

-   Community (Peripheral)

National (Central Level)

-   The national (central) level is the headquarters where political,
    professional and administrative matters are coordinated and policy
    decisions made. It is headed by a minister, assistant minister and a
    permanent secretary, in that order of seniority. These leaders are
    politically appointed and need not be health professionals.

-   Next in this hierarchy comes the technical leader of health
      services, that is, the Director of Medical Services (DMS). The
      Director of Medical Services supervises all matters pertaining to
      preventive, promotive and curative health services. They are
      assisted by Deputy Directors, who are responsible for the various
      divisions which deal with the different responsibilities, such as
      mental health, communicable diseases and health planning, among
      others.

  Organisation of Health Services

County Level

The Ministry of Health is represented at the county level by the County
Medical Officer, who is a senior medical officer in charge of
organisation and administration of health services within the province.

The County Medical Officer is answerable to the Director of Medical
Services at the Ministry of Health headquarters. At the county level,
they are assisted by other health officers responsible for various
county health care departments, for example, county matron. At the
county level, there is usually a county hospital

District Level

The district is the basic organisational unit of the government health
services. It is a key level in the health sector administrative setup
because the government decentralised almost all of its activities and
made the district the focus for rural development. The government
delivers health care to the district population through:

-   A district or sub-district hospital

-   Health centres

-   Dispensaries

-   Mobile (outreach) units

The district health service is headed by a District Medical Officer of
Health (DMOH) also refered to as Medical Officer of Health (MOH). The
administrative headquarters of the district health services are usually
at the district or sub-district hospital, where the DMOH is in most
cases also the medical superintendent of the hospital.

The district hospital provides limited specialised medical services and
also logistic and technical support to the health centres and
dispensaries in the periphery. It is a crucial link in the
administrative support and referral chain of health services being
provided to the population in
the communities

The duties of the MOH include:

-   Administration of the district health services

-   Hospital work and other clinical duties

-   Training of staff in the district

-   Planning and coordinating all health activities in the district

-   Supervision of health care delivery in the district

District Level

The MOH does not work in isolation. They head a team of health
professionals who form the District Health Management Team (DHMT).

The DHMT is charged with the responsibility of monitoring and
supervising all health care services in the district. Most of the
members of the DHMT are found at the district hospital. The other key
members of the DHMT are found at the
district administrative headquarters

The members of the DHMT include:

-   The District Medical Officer of Health (Chairman)

-   The District Public Health Nurse

-   The District Hospital Nursing officer incharge

-   The District Public Health Officer

-   The District Public Health Education Officer

-   The District Health Administrative Officer

-   The District Health Information Officer

-   The District Pharmacist

The DHMT has other co-opted members who include:

-   District HIV/AIDS/STD Coordinator

-   District Physiotherapist

-   District Clinical Officer

-   District Nutritionist

-   District Laboratory Technologist

-   District Orthopaedician

Important functions of the DHMT include:

-   Formulating relevant health objectives for the district in keeping
    with the county and national health policies.

-   Identifying health problems and needs in the district.

-   Training and deployment of staff to health facilities.

-   Planning and coordinating health activities for optimal utilisation
    of district resources.

-   Supervising all health care activities and services within the
    district.

-   Collecting and analysing data on community health needs and
    assessing
    health coverage.

-   Monitoring and supporting the rural health staff and community
    health workers.

-   Licensing health facilities/clinics

The District Public Health Nurse

The District Public Health Nurse (DPHN), also known as the District
Community Health Nurse, is an important member of the DHMT and is
responsible to the DMOH (is supervised by the DMOH).

The main duties and responsibilities of the DPHN are:

-   Planning, organising and supervising all community health activities
    in the district.

-   Deploying nursing staff to community/rural health facilities.

-   Conducting staff update courses.

-   Collecting health information and compiling reports about community
    health services.

-   Planning and coordinating health campaigns.

-   Procurement, storage and distribution of EPI vaccines.

-   Implementing health development projects for the district
    development committee

Community/Peripheral Level

The last level in this hierarchy is the community/peripheral level. This
is really at the community level where there are divisions, locations
and sub-locations. Here health centres, dispensaries and in some places,
community based health workers provide basic curative, promotive and
preventive services. They may be augmented by the activities of special
programmes, such as KEPI, or various mobile services. These health
services together form the backbone of rural health service where about
80% of the population live.

Not everyone gets all their medical care from government facilities.
People are also treated by other health institutions supported by
private and religious organisations.

[]

INTERGRETED HEALTH SERVICES

1.  SCHOOL HEALTH

In Kenya, it is your responsibility as a community health nurse to
design school health programmes. In order to organise a practical school
health programme you need to involve the rest of the health team
members, the school administration and the community.

The following are members of the school health team:

-   Teachers

-   Pupils and students

-   Parents

-   Community formal and informal leaders

-   Community health nurse

To organise a good school health programme, you need to do the
following:

-   Assess the problems of school children

-   Establish practical goals for the school population

-   Carry out the needed activities

-   Evaluate the process and results of the programs

The whole idea behind a school health programme, is to ensure that the
needs of the school child are met

NEEDS OF THE SCHOOL CHILD

A Stable Home
The home should provide basic needs especially shelter and security.

Proper Nutrition
The child needs to grow well physically and mentally. It is therefore
important for the child to take adequate nutrition at least three times
a day. The diet should have extra proteins and vitamins to meet there
nutritional needs.
This will help the child to cope with demands of school life. The meals
may be provided at home, school, or may be packed.

Freedom from Fatigue
The child needs to have enough rest at home from school activities.
The evening meal should be taken early so that the child will have
enough sleep and rest.

Clothing
This is normally provided as school uniform, which should be clean and
tidy. The child needs to wear shoes to prevent injuries and hookworm
infestation

Good Sight, Hearing and Speech
Defects of sight, hearing and speech interfere with the learning process
of a child. Early detection of all disabilities and referral to
appropriate specialist is a very important activity of a school health
programme.

Freedom from Infection
All school children should be immunised against childhood diseases.
Treatment of common conditions, for example colds, skin rashes, sore
throat and cuts should also be given. The treatment could take place in
the school clinic or in the local health care facility.
Pure and Safe Water
This should be provided in the school and at home to prevent water
related diseases. Adequate sanitation, proper excreta and refuse
disposal is important at home and in school.

Clean Buildings
The home and school environment should be kept clean.

OBJECTIVES OF SCHOOL HEALTH

The health programmes aim at:

-   Promoting and maintaining the health of the school children.

-   Promoting positive health behaviour among staff
    and students.

-   Bringing up citizens who understand basic good
    health habits.

-   Ensuring general community health by using the child as a channel
    for health messages to the family.

-   Improving the physical and social environment of the school.

-   Providing the following aspects of prevention of disease; Primary
    prevention, for example eating diets rich in vitamins A and C, iron
    and protein; Secondary prevention, that is, early diagnosis and
    treatment; Tertiary prevention which includes rehabilitation.

SCHOOL HEALTH ACTIVITIES

The following activities are undertaken to achieve the objectives of the
school health programme:

-   Carrying out observation, screening, physical examination and
    epidemiological investigations.

-   Rendering emergency services and care of a
    continuing illness.

-   Counselling or arranging for counselling of pupils, teachers and
    other persons in the school population.

-   Involving parents, pupils and teachers in planning and conducting
    health care activities.

-   Contributing to the development of a curriculum in health related
    matters, through clubs such as, biology, mathematics, scout
    association, Red Cross, social clubs and home science.

-   Consultation with teachers and other personnel.

-   Referral for specialised/continued care.

PLANNING SCHOOL HEALTH PROGRAM

The first step in organising a school health programme is to assess the
health problems. One way of doing this is by conducting a survey.

Assessing Health Needs /Source of information

The Clinic Records

Clinic records from the health care facility near the school. This will
provide information about the health problems that are commonly seen
among school children who attend the centre

Reports
Previous reports on school health services at the health centre and at
the district level. These reports are given monthly and quarterly

Health Team Workers

You can hold discussions with the health care teams in your catchment
area, to find out health problems of school children and their possible
solutions.

Teachers, Students and Parents

Discussions with teachers, students and parents will yield useful
information about their problems, and will also give you a chance to
explain the importance of school health services.

Personal Observations and Experiences
You can gather a lot of information merely by observing and listening to
people, as you make contact and interact with them.

Formal and Informal Leaders
Village leaders usually have a repertoire about the most disturbing
health care problems, and can assist you to plan school health services

Once you gather the information regarding the health needs of school
children in your catchment area, you then need to discuss your findings,
and plan your programme with stakeholders from the Ministry of Health.

These include the:

-   District medical officers of health

-   District public health nurse

-   Transport officers

-   District health administrative officer

-   District health education officer

-   District public health officer

-   District medical records officer

Implementing a school health programme requires quite a lot of
resources. You will require funds for equipment, drugs, supplies, fuel
and staff. You will also need cooperation from your team members. It is
therefore very important for you to carefully identify each member of
the team, and discuss with them their roles during the school health
services.

During the planning phase you also need to consider the following
supporting activities.

Effective partnerships between teachers and health workers, and between
the education and health sectors. The success of school health
programmes demands an effective partnership between ministries of
education and health, and teachers and health workers.

The health sector retains the responsibility for the health of children,
but the education sector is responsible for implementing, and often
funding the school based programmes. These sectors need to identify
responsibilities and present a coordinated action, to improve health and
learning outcomes from children.

Pupil Awareness and Participation
Children must be important participants in all aspects of school health
programmes, and not simply the beneficiaries.

Children should participate in health policy development and
implementation efforts, to create a safer and more sanitary environment.

Health promotion aimed at their parents, other children, community
members is taught during school health services. Children in turn
disseminate. This is an effective way to help young people and the
community acquire the knowledge, attitudes, values and skills needed to
adopt healthy lifestyles, and to support health and education for all

Implementing School Health Services

You should start by preparing a work plan together with members of your
health facility team. Make sure you allow enough time, depending on the
number of schools to be covered and their health needs.

You should also organise the resources you will need to perform the
tasks at hand, so that you and your team can be punctual on the day of
the service. Since some of the resources at your disposal will be
teachers, pupils and community leaders, remember to promote teamwork
during implementation.

ACTIVITIES DURING SCHOOL HEALTH

Physical Examination
The objective of carrying out a physical examination is to recognize the
signs of common ailments, treat the minor ones and refer those which
require specialized attention. This examination should be done
systematically from head to toe for every child. A cumulative record of
a child’s history, medical examination and immunizations should be kept
for each child.

Referral Services

This service is given to children who have ailments needing care outside
the school. They are referred to the nearest health facility or
hospital, depending on the nature of illness and if it requires to be
seen by a specialist.
Inspection of the School Environment

Since the children spend a lot of the time in school, it is important to
ensure that their environment is safe and clean.
Location of the School
Surroundings should be clean, free from noise pollution, away from
industrial and other waste or swampy area

Sanitation
The school should have a good water supply, clean and enough latrines,
and solid waste disposal systems. There should be separate toilets for
female and male students. The environment should be clean and well
maintained.
Playground
It should be dry with no potholes or stones to prevent accidents.

Classroom

This should be clean, well ventilated with adequate lighting. It should
not be overcrowded and the students should be able to hear the teacher
and see the black board from where they sit.

Furniture

The seats should be simple and not attached to each other so that the
pupils can move them. The children’s feet should be able to touch the
floor when they are seated.

Promotion of Proper Nutrition
This consists of the importance of eating a balanced diet
and good feeding habits, if there is a feeding programme
observe the following:

-   Methods of cooking and storage of food

-   Personal hygiene of food handlers and children

-   Cleanliness of the utensils

-   Cleanliness of the kitchen

-   Screening of the food handlers
    Sharing Health Messages
    You should identify and plan to share the appropriate health
    messages with the school population. The health messages shared
    should include, prevention of common health problems, such as,
    sexually transmitted infections, HIV/AIDS, skin conditions amongst
    others.

Promotion of Personal Hygiene

This is done by advising the children to do the following:

-   Taking a daily bath

-   Brushing teeth after meals

-   Washing of hands before eating and after visiting the toilet

-   Keeping the hair and nails short and clean

-   Wearing clean clothes

Record Keeping
It is important to record every health activity that you undertake. This
applies to school health service activities. These records are used for
evaluation.
The records should reflect:

-   The number of schools covered.

-   The number of pupils treated and types of ailments

-   The number of pupils referred

-   Activities carried out

-   Health messages shared

-   Information on the environmental health

-   Effectiveness of the school health services

EVALUATING SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICES

When you started planning your school health services, you formulated
objectives. It is important to find out whether you have achieved them.
This is where you start when evaluating your school health services. You
should also ask yourselves the following questions:

-   Did you follow the work plan?

-   Were the services geared towards meeting the priority health needs?

-   Did you carry out all the necessary activities during the school
    health services?

-   How effective were the services you provided?

Gathering Information.
This is done using the same sources that you used earlier during
planning.

Analysing Information
Compare the work actually done with what you had indicated in your work
plan.

For example,

-   How many schools were included in your plan and how many actually
    received the services?

-   What is causing the difference between planned activities and the
    actual work done?

Identify Areas Needing Improvements
you can gather this information from your analysis once you identify the
type or nature of improvement needed, you will then need to decide your
course of action. It might be that you will need to change the roles and
activities of the team.

Take Corrective Action
Make a list of things that should be done and then go ahead and do them.

2). HOME VISITING

Assessment is the first step in the process approach to family health
care, but when do you carry out this assessment?
You could assess family members when they visit your health facility.
However, in order to get a comprehensive picture of a family’s health,
you need to visit them at home. Home visits are an important part of
your work as a community health nurse as they allow you to see families
and their needs in their own homes.

Home visiting is one of the essential community health services that you
should provide. It has two main purposes:

-   It allows you to follow up individual families at home to find out
    why some health problems persist in the community despite efforts to
    prevent or control them, for example malnutrition, communicable
    diseases, or repeated failure to attend clinics, especially if the
    family is at risk

-   It keeps you aware of what is going on in your catchment area

In order for you to conduct home visiting successfully, you need to have
the following skills:

-   Good technical skills and knowledge of preventive and therapeutic
    measures

-   Good communication skills and teaching ability

-   Good leadership skills and rational thinking to make sound judgments

-   Good counselling skills and an understanding of human relations

During home visits you act on your own, making decisions on the spot and
carrying them out.
You need to be prepared. When planning and implementing home visits, you
should be guided by some basic principles in order to make a success of
it.

Principles of Home Visiting

Home visits should be:

-   Planned and of benefit to the patient

-   Purposeful, clear and meet the patient‘s needs

-   Regular and flexible according to the needs of the patient

-   Educative to the patient. Home visits provide an excellent
    opportunity for health education

-   Used to demonstrate principles of health

-   Convenient and acceptable to the patient

-   Respectful of the patient‘s right to refuse care

-   Recorded in the appropriate case file

If you follow these basic principles when planning your home visits, you
will find your home visits fun and productive.

The Process of Home Visiting

The process of home visiting is carried out in five phases.

Entry or Initiation Phase

The community health nurse shares information with the patient on the
reason and purposes for home visits. This interaction may occur in a
hospital ward or at a clinic

Pre-visit Activities

Before the actual home visit, you have to look for information regarding
the patient and the family. You also need to gather information
regarding the location of the house, distance from your health facility
and the physical address. During pre-visit activities, you should
investigate the community resources, assemble supplies and prepare for
the first contact with the patient at their doorstep.

Activities During Home Visiting

This is the working phase during which you put into action your planned
health activities. During this phase you must establish trust and
rapport with the patient and the family so that there can be a positive
interpersonal relationship
(a professional nurse-patient relationship). This relationship will
enhance the achievement of the mutually determined health-oriented
goals.

Termination Phase of Visit

This occurs when the health oriented goals have been met. Termination of
home visits can occur due to any of the following reasons:

-   The patients’ health has been restored and the patient can function
    without the nurse

-   The patient has changed their residence

-   The community health nurse has transferred the patients’ care to
    another nurse or agency

Post-visit Activities

Post-visit activities include recording and reporting important events
of the home visits, and sharing the reports with the appropriate
authorities and individuals about the patient family.

Advantages of Home Visiting

-   Home visiting gives a more accurate assessment of the family
    structure and behaviour in their natural environment.

-   Home visits provide an opportunity to observe the physical
    environment of the home and identify barriers to, and resources for
    achieving family health.

-   At home, the nurse works with the patient first hand to implement
    health action using realistic resources.

-   By meeting the family on its home ground the nurse will be enhancing
    the family’s sense of control and active participation in meeting
    its health needs.

-   It provides an excellent opportunity to implement planned health
    care.

-   It provides an opportunity to learn about the home and family
    situation.

-   It provides an opportunity to render health care services to the
    family members in their own surroundings.

-   It creates a good understanding between the nurse and the patient
    and builds a good image of nurses.

-   It provides an opportunity to clarify the doubts and misconceptions
    raised by family members.

-   It provides an opportunity to observe and appreciate family
    practices and progress of care given by the nurse and others.

Disadvantages of Home Visiting

The disadvantages of home visiting include the following:

-   Home visits consume a lot the nurse's time and energy as well as
    transport fuel (petrol or diesel) or bus fare.

-   Unforeseen events may occur during home visits, which will interfere
    with planned activities.

-   The patient’s family may not accept the nurse due to various factors
    such as cultural or religious differences, personal characteristics
    of the nurse and the patient or to some extent, socio-economic
    status of the nurse and the patient.

-   Confusion of the nurse’s role in a community where there may be a
    lack of knowledge and understanding of the role of the community
    health nurse

FURTHER READING

Read on

-   Prevention of home accidents

-   Role of Children’s department

-   Probation department

-   District development committees
