COMMUNITY

: CONCEPT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH NURSING

As mentioned in the introduction to this module, community health is
concerned with the promotion of health and prevention of diseases
through close community participation

A community is a group of people (a large or small group) living in a
certain geographical area and working together for a common goal. They
share the same resources such as water, climatic and geographic
conditions, health services, administration and leadership, as well as
disadvantages such as shortages, risks
and dangers.

Functions of a Community

Community functions are a medium for the growth and development of the
community’s individual members. A good community is judged by the kind
of people it produces.

The functions of a community include:

-   Transmitting and sharing information, ideas and beliefs

-   Educating its children about their culture (socialising) and
    welcoming newcomers into the group’s culture (acculturation)

-   Producing and distributing services and goods

-   Providing companionship and support to individual members and
    smaller groups

-   Sharing and utilising space for living, schools, health facilities,
    fields, roads etc.

-   Protecting individual and group rights and welfare.

Remember: The greatest human possession is health.
A healthy community is a productive community.

Characteristics of a Healthy Community

-   Safe and healthy environment, relatively free from natural and
    man-made hazards

-   Community members have high standards of personal hygiene

-   Adequate supply of wholesome water

-   Availability of adequate nutritious food

-   Suitable housing

-   Harmonious interpersonal relationships among members

-   Availability and accessibility of health care facilities

-   Availability and accessibility of suitable educational, social and
    recreational facilities

-   Gainful occupational activities (availability of stable or reliable
    sources of income)

-   Sound communication infrastructure

-   Communal approach to and participation in tackling community
    problems

Problems that Affect the Health of the Community

-   Unsanitary environment  

-   Overcrowding

-   Poverty

-   Unclean and inadequate water supply

-   Lack of nutritious food

-   Unsafe environment

-   Epidemic and endemic disease

-   Unstable family life

-   Illiteracy and ignorance

-   Poor leadership and lack of participation

-   Adverse weather conditions

-   Poor infrastructure

-   Political instability

COMMUNITY SUB-SYSTEMS

A community is made up of various sub-systems, all of which have a
bearing on how people live and behave. For a community to function
smoothly the various sub-systems must work in harmony. In the next
sub-section you will look at the eight sub-systems found in a community
and how they influence the health of its people.

A community has eight essential sub-systems, which interact and
interrelate continuously. Take a look at each of these sub-systems in
detail to understand how they influence the health of people living
within a community.

-   Socio-cultural System

This system is made up of all the customs and beliefs, family and
kinships, leadership and power structures in society. This sub-system
exerts a powerful influence on the lifestyles of the community members,
their priorities and their attitudes and values towards health and
illness.

For example some cultural factors promote either acceptance or stigma
towards a certain illness. High-risk behaviour may be a result of
cultural traditions.

-   Political System

This sub-system is made up of the government and its development
policies as well as political organisations.
If there is political support towards improving health care delivery,
the government provides the mechanism and structure for the planning,
implementation and evaluation of the health care delivery system. The
constitution of Kenya contains a declaration for the elimination of
poverty, ignorance and disease; hence the establishment of the Ministry
of Health and several other ministries

-   Economic System

The government’s ability to provide health and other services to its
citizens depends on the state of the economy. The poorer the economy of
the country, the more disadvantaged its people will be. Low economic
status is highly associated with malnutrition and communicable diseases.

-   Education System

Education is the main tool of changing behaviour and improving
individual and community health.
Low educational status perpetuates under-development, harmful traditions
and superstitions.

The educational system can be effectively used to pass health related
information and messages that could significantly transform the
perception of the communities on healthy living and prevention of
illnesses.

-   Religious System

The religious system may be a source of health promotion when its values
and teachings positively influence lifestyles and healthy behaviour, for
example, forbidding smoking, alcohol consumption, pre-marital and
extra-marital sex.
On the other hand, religious teachings may promote ill health, for
example, by forbidding the followers from seeking treatment in
hospitals.

-   Environmental System

Environmental sanitation is one of the leading promoters of individual
and community health. Clean water supply, proper disposal of waste and
adequate housing are key to community wellness. Environmental pollution
is a cause of various illnesses.

-   Communication and Transport System

Communication includes all the means of contacting and exchanging
information with one another such as roads, bridges, railroad,
telephone, television, radio, computers, internet, fax, and postal
services.

The communication system is important in spreading health messages.
Transport aids in communication by moving people from place to place.

-   Health Care system

The health care system exists to provide promotive, preventive, curative
and rehabilitative services in hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, health
centres, dispensaries, and through special health projects and programs.

The health care system is enhanced through linkages that bring together
the government, non-governmental organisations, private institutions and
individuals in providing continuous and comprehensive health services.
These linkages strengthen the multi-sectoral approach of achieving
health for all.

CONCEPT OF COMMUNITY HEALTH

Community health is the science and art of promoting health and
preventing diseases through organised community participation.

Aims of Community Health

Community health aims to achieve the following:

-   Improved sanitation in the environment

-   Prioritisation of the community’s needs

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Health education to promote healthy behaviour and practices

-   Early diagnosis and prevention of disease

-   Disease surveillance

-   Case/contact tracing and treatment

-   Empowerment of all individuals to realise their rights and
    responsibilities for the attainment of good health for all

Goals of community health

The main goals of community health are to:

-   Identify community health problems and needs

-   Plan ways of meeting community health needs

-   Implement activities geared towards meeting the community health
    needs

-   Evaluate the impact of community health services/activities

Benefits of community health

A successful community health programme is one in which the community
and health care providers collaborate to achieve the following benefits:

-   Increased life expectancy (life span) of every individual

-   Decreased mortality rates particularly of mothers and children

-   Decreased morbidity rates from all causes

-   An increase in the total well-being (physical, mental and social) of
    every individual

-   An increase in the quality of life for all people

-   Overall social and economic development of the population

-   Equitable distribution of resources

-   Having looked at the aims, goals, and benefits of community health,
    you will now explore the activities which you are expected to
    undertake in community health, also referred to as the scope of
    community health.

Community health activities

-   Health education, counselling, and the training of other health
    workers

-   Community health assessment and diagnosis

-   Information, education and communication

-   Environmental sanitation and supply of adequate clean wholesome
    water

-   Food hygiene and household food security

-   Personal hygiene

-   Vector and pest control

-   Control of communicable diseases

-   Provision of prenatal services to pregnant women

-   Provision of family planning services

-   Provision of child health/welfare services for children under five
    years old

-   Provision of school health services

-   Home visiting and home-based nursing care

-   Occupational/industrial health

-   Care of the disabled, the elderly, the disadvantaged, the
    chronically ill

-   Inter-sectoral collaboration

PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNITY HEALTH

A principle is a basic belief, theory, or rule that has a major
influence on the way in which something is done.

Principles are the basic ideas of conduct or rules of action. They
provide the community health nurse with a clear and rational framework
to guide their work.

Principles of Community Health (Alma Ata Declaration - WHO 1978)

-   Availability of health care for all people and at a cost they can
    afford

-   Promotive and preventive aspects of health care

-   Integration of curative and preventive services

-   Active participation of individuals and communities in the planning
    and provision of care

-   Development of maximum potential for self-care

-   Utilisation of all levels and types of community manpower

-   Inter-sectoral approach

Principles of Community Health (Hentsch - 1985)

-   Health care should be shaped around the life patterns of the
    population. It should meet the needs of the community.

-   Primary health care should be an integral part of the national
    health system.

-   Health care activities should be fully integrated with the
    activities of the other sectors involved in community development
    such as agriculture, education, public works, housing and
    communication.

-   The local population should be actively involved in the formulation
    and implementation of health care activities, so that health care
    can be brought into line with local needs and priorities.

-   The health care offered should place a maximum reliance on available
    community resources, especially those that have hither to remained
    untapped and should remain within the cost limitations relevant to
    each country.

-   The majority of interventions should be undertaken at the most
    peripheral practice level of the health services and by the workers
    most suitably trained for performing these activities.

Principles of Community Health Nursing

-   Community health nursing services should be available to all,
    according to their health needs regardless of sex, age, culture,
    religion, social or economic status, race, political affiliation,
    ethnicity or nationality.

-   A community health nursing must have clearly defined objectives and
    purposes for its services.

-   Community health nursing should not be a vertical programme. A
    community health nurse must work with other stakeholders in the
    development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
    community health programme. 

-   Community health nursing should involve the community right through
    the planning implementation and evaluation of the programme.

-   The community health nursing should build the capacity of the
    community to run their own health programme for the purpose of
    sustainability. These include training of the Communities Own
    Resource Persons (CORPs).

-   Health education and counselling for the individual, family and
    community are integral parts of community health nursing. 

-   Community health nursing services should be based on the identified
    needs of the patient and there should be continuity of services to
    the patient. 

-   Community health nursing should work within the community’s culture
    and norms without compromising professionalism.

-   Community health nursing is a service and there should therefore be
    no room to demand favours, gifts or bribes from clients. 

-   Community health nursing is dynamic and the nurses should therefore
    actively participate in continuing professional development so as to
    keep abreast with new developments.

-   Community health nursing services should develop proper guidelines
    and maintain proper records and reports.

Remember: The community health nurse must maintain ethics as well as a
professional relationship with all the individuals and groups in the
community, at all times.

The Roles and Functions of a Community Health Nurse

The Roles and Functions of a Community Health Nurse

  --------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Roles                 Functions

  Manager               Organizing and managing health care programs, being a
                        team leader for nursing and supervising community health
                        nursing activities.

  Implementer           Implementing community health action/programs in
                        collaboration with the other stakeholders in community
                        health. Creating community awareness and interest in
                        their health. Developing the community’s ability to
                        assess their health status and resources. Sharing
                        knowledge and skills with the community on how to
                        improve their health and to prevent illness.

  Advocator             Advise the health care providers, planners and other
                        agencies on the needs/problems of the community.

  Advisor               Sharing technical health information with individual
                        families and communities.

  Health educator       Teaching individuals and families how to prevent disease
                        and improve
                        their health.

  Assessor/Identifier   Assessing the health status of the community.
                        Identifying existing and potential health needs/problems
                        and resources in the community.

  Planner               Planning for health action with the other health team
                        members and
                        community members.

  Evaluator             Evaluating the performance and the outcome of community
                        health activities.

  Researcher            Carrying out surveys, studies and research to identify
                        problems related to
                        your work.

  Trainer               Training other community health workers, both designated
                        and voluntary community-based health workers.
  --------------------- --------------------------------------------------------

HOME VISITING

Home visits are an important part of your work as a community health
nurse as they allow you to see families and their needs in their own
homes.

Home visiting is one of the essential community health services that you
should provide. It has two main purposes:

-   It allows you to follow up individual families at home to find out
    why some health problems persist in the community despite efforts to
    prevent or control them, for example malnutrition, communicable
    diseases, or repeated failure to attend clinics, especially if the
    family is at risk

-   It keeps you aware of what is going on in your
    catchment area.

In order for you to conduct home visiting successfully, you need to have
the following skills:

-   Good technical skills and knowledge of preventive and therapeutic
    measures

-   Good communication skills and
    teaching ability

-   Good leadership skills and rational thinking to make sound judgments

-   Good counselling skills and an understanding of human relations

During home visits you act on your own, making decisions on the spot and
carrying them out.
You need to be prepared. When planning and implementing home visits, you
should be guided by some basic principles in order to make a
success of it.

Principles of Home Visiting

Home visits should be:

-   Planned and of benefit to the patient

-   Purposeful, clear and meet the patient‘s needs

-   Regular and flexible according to the needs of the patient

-   Educative to the patient. Home visits provide an excellent
    opportunity
    for health education

-   Used to demonstrate principles of health

-   Convenient and acceptable to the patient

-   Respectful of the patient‘s right to refuse care

-   Recorded in the appropriate case file

If you follow these basic principles when planning your home visits, you
will find your home visits fun and productive.

The Process of Home Visiting

The process of home visiting is carried out in five phases.

a.  Entry or Initiation Phase

The community health nurse shares information with the patient on the
reason and purposes for home visits. This interaction may occur in a
hospital ward or at a clinic.

b.  Pre-visit Activities

Before the actual home visit, you have to look for information regarding
the patient and the family. You also need to gather information
regarding the location of the house, distance from your health facility
and the physical address. During pre-visit activities, you should
investigate the community resources, assemble supplies and prepare for
the first contact with the patient at their doorstep.

c.  Home Visiting phase

This is the working phase during which you put into action your planned
health activities. During this phase you must establish trust and
rapport with the patient and the family so that there can be a positive
interpersonal relationship
(a professional nurse-patient relationship). This relationship will
enhance the achievement of the mutually determined health-oriented goals

d.  Termination Phase of Visit

This occurs when the health oriented goals have been met. Termination of
home visits can occur due to any of the following reasons:

-   The patients’ health has been restored and the patient can function
    without the nurse

-   The patient has changed their residence

-   The community health nurse has transferred the patients’ care to
    another nurse or agency.

    a.  Post-visit Activities

Post-visit activities include recording and reporting important events
of the home visits, and sharing the reports with the appropriate
authorities and individuals about the patient family

Advantages and Disadvantages of Home Visiting

There are many good nursing reasons (advantages) for carrying out home
visiting. Though the activity does have its disadvantages, they are
quite insignificant compared to its advantages. You should therefore try
to overcome them through careful planning so that they do not prevent
you from carrying out this important activity.

Advantages of Home Visiting

-   Home visiting gives a more accurate assessment of the family
    structure and behaviour in their natural environment.

-   Home visits provide an opportunity to observe the physical
    environment of the home and identify barriers to, and resources for
    achieving family health. 

-   At home, the nurse works with the patient first hand to implement
    health action using realistic resources. 

-   By meeting the family on its home ground the nurse will be enhancing
    the family’s sense of control and active participation in meeting
    its health needs.

-   It provides an excellent opportunity to implement planned health
    care.

-   It provides an opportunity to learn about the home and family
    situation.

-   It provides an opportunity to render health care services to the
    family members in their own surroundings.

-   It creates a good understanding between the nurse and the patient
    and builds a good image of nurses. 

-   It provides an opportunity to clarify the doubts and misconceptions
    raised by family members.

-   It provides an opportunity to observe and appreciate family
    practices and progress of care given by the nurse and others.

Home visiting provides an excellent opportunity to implement health care
which was planned or was started in the hospital.

Disadvantages of Home Visiting

The disadvantages of home visiting include the following:

-   Home visits consume a lot the nurse's time and energy as well as
    transport fuel (petrol or diesel) or bus fare.

-   Unforeseen events may occur during home visits, which will interfere
    with planned activities.

-   The patient’s family may not accept the nurse due to various factors
    such as cultural or religious differences, personal characteristics
    of the nurse and the patient or to some extent, socio-economic
    status of the nurse and the patient.

-   Confusion of the nurse’s role in a community where there may be
    a lack of knowledge and understanding of the role of the community
    health nurse.

[]
